- [Instructor] Let us now understand
what is this generics feature all about.
Generics in Java gives you a way
to define parameterized types.
This means that you can have classes and interfaces
with parameters enabled on them.
These kind of classes and interfaces
exist in the Java APIs Today.
You can also write such classes and interfaces of your own.
Let us understand this better
by comparing pre and post generics code
of the ArrayList class from the collections API.
Before the advent of generics
the ArrayList definition looked like this,
public class ArrayList
and it is followed by an extends clause,
and implements clause
which is indicated by those dots on the slide,
and then you have the curly pair of braces
in which you have the entire code.
But we are not concerned about those details.
What we are interested in
is this part at the beginning, public class ArrayList.
After the generics feature got introduced in the language,
the definition of ArrayList changed to something like this,
public class ArrayList,
and now it is followed by a of angle brackets.
In between those angle brackets sits E
that is marked in bold.
This E is called the type parameter.
And this is the parameter
that has now been enabled on the class.
So if you look at the detailed code implementation
of the ArrayList class,
you'll find that this E will be replaced
by any desired type argument that you pass
when you instantiate the ArrayList class.
Let us now understand
how can you invoke this generic type ArrayList.
So here we have the generic class,
public class ArrayList of E,
and now let's say you want to create an ArrayList
which can hold values of integer type only.
In this case, you will instantiate ArrayList like this,
new ArrayList, followed by a pair of angle brackets,
and in between those brackets
you mention the type argument.
In this case it'll be in integer
because you want to create an ArrayList of integers.
This will be followed by a pair of round brackets
and then the semicolon.
The round brackets is the constructor call
which is part of the object creation process in Java.
So now you can think of this integer type
replacing that parameter E
that we saw in the ArrayList definition.
Similarly, let's say you want to create an a
that holds string values.
Then you will invoke that ArrayList generic type
by instantiating the ArrayList class like this.
New ArrayList of String
followed by a pair of round brackets.
So now you can think of this String type
replacing that parameter E in the ArrayList definition.
So you may think of this approach
as restricting the kind of values
that you're inserting in the ArrayList.
Not really, in most of the typical coding scenarios
that we have, we do not want to mix values of integer
and string type together in the same collection.
We always want that the collection
or let's say a particular collection
holds values only of a certain type.
If you're wondering what was that E
in the definition of the ArrayList
and why was it named like that.
Don't bother too much about it.
It is a part of the naming convention
for type parameter which we will get to later.
This kind of a generic class can then hold
all kinds of operations
to be performed on a varied number of types.
And this offers developers an opportunity
to develop generic algorithms.
Generics feature was introduced
as a part of Java JDK 5.0 version,
and it is one of the most indispensable features
in the language today.
All the code of the collection API is written with generics.
Pick any framework from Java
or the enterprise edition of Java
and you'll see that generic is all over the place.
It is a vital feature that every Java developer
should know and learn.
In order to understand generics invocation
and the basic definition better, we can compare this
with the method definition and invocation.
Let's see how.
Let's say you have a class Product
and you have a method defined in it, public void additem,
and it takes a parameter of the type item.
If you want to call this a or invoke this method
you're going to do this.
You'll create an object of the Product class
and after that, you'll call the method additem
and this time you're going to pass an argument
of the item type.
In this case an object of the item class.
Generic definition and invocation is very similar to this.
Let's see how.
If you look at the List generic type it looks like this,
public interface List of E extends collection of E.
If you look at the ArrayList generic type
it looks like this, public class ArrayList of E,
extends AbstractList of E, implements List of E, et cetera.
If you want to invoke this generic definition
you will write code like this.
List of Product data equal to new ArrayList of Product.
Let's see this piece by piece.
When you say List of Product data
it means you created a reference variable data
which is of the type List.
And this List is going to hold values
only of the Product type.
So the Product type that is mentioned in the angle brackets
is going to replace the parameter E
that we saw in the List generic type.
Similarly, when you created an object
of the ArrayList class, you said ArrayList of Product.
So now the Product type
mentioned in the angle brackets again is going to replace E
that we saw in the declaration
of the ArrayList generic type.
Let's do one thing.
Let's rewrite a previous code with the generics feature
and see the difference that it makes.
Let's go back to the IDE and I'll create a class.
This time let's label this as GenericsCode.
In this class
we are going to write the same code more or less
but we are going to write everything
with the generics feature.
So let's start and create the List type of variable.
But this time, in addition to just writing List
I'm going to follow it with a pair of angle brackets
and I'm going to mention the type String,
and then let's give a variable name to this.
Let's say Languages.
So what we did is we created a reference variable Languages
which is of the List type,
but this List is now going to hold values
of the String type only.
So we invoked the generic type List on line number seven.
This is just a reference.
Let's also create the objects.
So we'll say new ArrayList.
Now the word ArrayList will again
be followed by a pair of angle brackets,
and I'm going to mention the type here as well,
followed by the pair of round brackets,
the constructor call
which is the object creation process in Java.
And please note that the type argument String
is exactly the same on both the sides
of the assignment operator.
If you give it any different, it won't work.
Now let's come on the next line and say Languages.add.
Now if you look at the method signature,
you observe that it is asking you to add something
of the type String as opposed to object
that we saw in our previous video.
So let's go ahead and add our languages.
Add Swedish.
Let's also call the method, ProcessLanguages.
It's the same thing that we did in the previous video
and pass that Languages list as an argument.
Let's come out of the main method
and write the private static void ProcessLanguages method
and take a parameter of the type List.
So on line number eight
we created a list with generics.
On line number 14, we have a parameter data
which is of the type List.
But if you observe on line 14 the parameter List
is not followed by angle brackets,
and there are no arguments mentioned for types.
So this is still a raw type but the code compiles well,
we are all good.
Now let's come on line 15 and say String Language
equal to data.get zero.
Unfortunately this line still doesn't come by
but we thought that we are using generics
and now we don't have to do the casting, correct?
But the problem here is that
on line number 14 the parameter data,
which is of the list type is still a raw type.
If you want utilize the complete power of generics
we need to invoke the generics even for this parameter.
So I'm now going to modify,
follow this List with a pair of angle brackets
and mention the type here as well.
The moment we do this,
the compilation on line 15 is successful,
and then you can go ahead
and print the Language variable to the console.
So if you run this code everything will definitely go well
and we will have English printed on a console.
So the first issue that we were talking about
in the previous video is solved.
We do not have to do any kind of explicit casting
on line number 15, that's gone.
So the clutter that we introduced is gone.
The second issue was about type safety.
Let's understand how that works with generics.
So on line number nine let's do the same thing
instead of the string value, let's add a number 23.
And this time we are getting a compilation problem.
It says that the required type is String
but you're providing an integer.
So this is the magic that generic spins for you.
On line number eight, since you already declared
that the Languages list must contain values
only of the String type.
The moment you try to add an integer value
on line number nine, the compilation stage itself fails.
The compiler says you are adding a wrong value
into the collection, and I will not permit that.
So now, since this code does not compile
I will have to ensure that I add values
only of the String type.
So this is how the type safety is guaranteed using generics.
Since the compilation
does not allow us to add wrong values to the collection,
we will never run into any kind of potential problems
like the class cast exception at run type.
So there we go.
That's how generics solves those two issues
that we talked about.
When we wrote this generic called class
what we actually did is generify the code.